Edits3 (#85)
jhudsl/Computing_for_Cancer_Informatics: 07-Computing_Decisions.Rmd

# Computing Resource Decisions

Now that we have discussed a bit about how computers perform computations and described a bit about computing options, let's discuss more about how you might choose the right computing resources for your work. In this chapter, we will discuss aspects that you should consider when deciding between different computing resource options. 

```{r, fig.align='center', echo = FALSE, fig.alt= "Learning Objectives: 1. Recognize the main aspects to focus on when deciding on what computing systems to use. 2. Be aware of the benefits and drawbacks of various options. 3. Know what to watch out for in computing decisions.", out.width="100%"}
ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1B4LwuvgA6aUopOHEAbES1Agjy7Ex2IpVAoUIoBFbsq0/edit#slide=id.g115e0d5ae79_0_0")
```

> To choose the best opportunity to perform the informatics research for you, it is useful to become familiar with the benefits and drawbacks of various computing options. First, we will start out with some general considerations that you should think about when beginning to determine what computing option makes sense for your work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To help you make an informed decision about computing resources, it is useful to become familiar with the benefits and drawbacks of various computing options. First, we will start out with some general considerations that you should think about when beginning to determine what computing option makes sense for your work.
```

### Computation needs

> Now that you know more about determining your personal computer's computing and storage capacity, as well as how to determine or estimate the files sizes that you might use for your research, you can begin to assess if your personal computer is up to the task. When determining what your computing needs might be, remember to evaluate how many files you might use in your analyses, the file sizes, the amount of RAM and CPUs (and possibly GPUs that your computer has) and some level of understanding for how intensive the computing tasks are that you plan to perform. How do you assess this? If the files that you intend to use in your analysis are quite large for your computer's storage capacity, then it is likely that your computer might struggle to work with such files. This might also be the case if you plan to use many smaller files (such as hundreds or thousands, but smaller files can add up quickly). Finally, if you plan to perform many steps on your files in your analysis, this may also require more computing resources than you have available on your current personal computer. Shared computing options will generally have the capacity to allow you to do your work, unless you have very large data needs and hope to use a very specialized computing platform that may not support large-scale work. If you have plans to analyze large datasets, checking the computing capacity of the local or remote computing options that you are interested before you start an analysis would be a good idea. Cloud computing options can be great if you need more efficiency, as there are no job queues to worry about like with other, more traditional shared resources. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you know more about determining your personal computer's computing and storage capacity, as well as how to determine or estimate the files sizes that you might use for your research, you can begin to assess if your personal computer is up to the task. When determining what your computing needs might be, remember to evaluate how many files you might use in your analyses, the file sizes, the amount of RAM and CPUs (and possibly GPUs that your computer has) and some level of understanding for how intensive the computing tasks are that you plan to perform. How do you assess this? If the files that you intend to use in your analysis are quite large for your computer's storage capacity, then it is likely that your computer might struggle to work with such files. This might also be the case if you plan to use many smaller files (such as hundreds or thousands, but smaller files can add up quickly). Finally, if you plan to perform many steps on your files in your analysis, this may also require more computing resources than you have available on your current personal computer. Shared computing options will generally have the capacity to allow you to do your work, unless you have very large data needs. If you have plans to analyze large datasets, it would be a good idea to check the computing capacity of the local or remote computing options that you are interested in before you start an analysis. Cloud computing options can be great if you need more efficiency, as there are no job queues to worry about like with more traditional shared resources. 
```
